README.md, before:

# BookStore API - SENG 468 Assignment 1

A simple e-commerce REST API with intentional performance issues for learning performance measurement and profiling.

## Overview

This is a Python Flask application that provides a REST API for an online bookstore. The application has several **intentional performance issues** that you will need to discover through systematic profiling and load testing.

## Technology Stack

- **Backend:** Python 3.10 with Flask
- **Database:** PostgreSQL 15
- **ORM:** SQLAlchemy
- **Deployment:** Docker Compose

## Architecture

```
┌─────────┐      ┌──────────────┐      ┌────────────┐
│ Client  │─────▶│  Flask App   │─────▶│ PostgreSQL │
│ (wrk)   │      │  (Port 5000) │      │ (Port 5432)│
└─────────┘      └──────────────┘      └────────────┘
```

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose
- curl or httpie (for testing)
- Load testing tool (wrk, Apache Bench, or Locust)

### Quick Start

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/uvic-seng468/assignment1-bookstore.git
cd assignment1-bookstore
```

2. **Start the application**
```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

3. **Wait for services to be ready** (about 10 seconds)
```bash
# Check if app is running
curl http://localhost:5000/health
```

4. **Load sample data**
```bash
docker-compose exec app python scripts/load_data.py
```

This will generate:
- 10,000 books
- 1,000 users  
- 5,000 reviews

5. **Verify data loaded**
```bash
curl http://localhost:5000/api/books | jq '.total'
# Should return: 10000
```

### Stopping the Application

```bash
docker-compose down
```

To remove all data:
```bash
docker-compose down -v
```

## API Endpoints

### Books

**List all books (paginated)**
```bash
GET /api/books?page=1&per_page=20

curl http://localhost:5000/api/books?page=1&per_page=20
```

**Get single book**
```bash
GET /api/books/:id

curl http://localhost:5000/api/books/1
```

**Create book (admin)**
```bash
POST /api/books

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/books \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "The Great Book",
    "author": "John Doe",
    "price": 29.99,
    "stock": 50,
    "category": "Fiction"
  }'
```

### Search

**Search books by title or author**
```bash
GET /api/search?q=query

curl http://localhost:5000/api/search?q=great
```

### Recommendations

**Get personalized recommendations**
```bash
GET /api/recommendations?user_id=1

curl http://localhost:5000/api/recommendations?user_id=1
```

### Cart

**Add to cart**
```bash
POST /api/cart/add

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/cart/add \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "user_id": 1,
    "book_id": 5,
    "quantity": 2
  }'
```

**View cart**
```bash
GET /api/cart?user_id=1

curl http://localhost:5000/api/cart?user_id=1
```

### Checkout

**Process order**
```bash
POST /api/checkout

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/checkout \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"user_id": 1}'
```

## Load Testing Examples

### Using wrk

**Baseline test** (100 concurrent users, 60 seconds)
```bash
wrk -t4 -c100 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/books
```

**Test search endpoint**
```bash
wrk -t4 -c100 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/search?q=great
```

**Test recommendations endpoint**
```bash
wrk -t4 -c50 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/recommendations?user_id=1
```

### Using Apache Bench

```bash
ab -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:5000/api/books
```

### Using Locust

Create `locustfile.py`:
```python
from locust import HttpUser, task, between

class BookStoreUser(HttpUser):
    wait_time = between(1, 3)
    
    @task(3)
    def list_books(self):
        self.client.get("/api/books?page=1")
    
    @task(2)
    def search_books(self):
        self.client.get("/api/search?q=book")
    
    @task(1)
    def get_recommendations(self):
        self.client.get("/api/recommendations?user_id=1")
```

Run:
```bash
locust -f locustfile.py --host=http://localhost:5000
```

## Profiling Examples

### CPU Profiling with cProfile

```bash
# Profile the application
docker-compose exec app python -m cProfile -o profile.stats app.py

# Analyze results
docker-compose exec app python -c "
import pstats
p = pstats.Stats('profile.stats')
p.sort_stats('cumulative').print_stats(20)
"
```

### Memory Profiling with memory_profiler

Add `@profile` decorator to functions in `app.py`, then:

```bash
docker-compose exec app python -m memory_profiler app.py
```

### Database Query Logging

PostgreSQL slow query log is automatically enabled. View logs:

```bash
docker-compose logs db | grep "duration"
```

### Enable SQLAlchemy Query Logging

Add to `app.py`:
```python
import logging
logging.basicConfig()
logging.getLogger('sqlalchemy.engine').setLevel(logging.INFO)
```

## Known Performance Issues

The application has several **intentional** performance problems:

1. **N+1 Query Problems**
   - Book listing fetches reviews separately for each book
   - Cart viewing fetches book details one by one
   - Search results calculate ratings with separate queries

2. **Missing Database Indexes**
   - No index on `books.title` (used in search)
   - No index on `books.author` (used in search)
   - Full table scans on search queries

3. **Inefficient Algorithms**
   - Recommendation engine uses CPU-intensive scoring
   - Wasteful loop iterations (100 iterations per book!)
   - In-memory sorting of all books

4. **Memory Leak**
   - Recommendation cache grows unbounded
   - New cache entry every minute
   - Never cleaned up

5. **No Caching**
   - No Redis cache configured
   - No HTTP caching headers
   - Every request hits database

6. **Other Issues**
   - Synchronous I/O (no async)
   - No connection pooling optimization
   - No query result caching

## Your Task

Use load testing and profiling to:

1. **Measure** baseline performance
2. **Identify** these bottlenecks systematically
3. **Profile** to find exact locations in code
4. **Recommend** specific fixes with expected impact

**Don't guess!** Use profiling data to prove where the problems are.

## Troubleshooting

### Port already in use
```bash
# Change ports in docker-compose.yml
ports:
  - "5001:5000"  # Use port 5001 instead
```

### Database connection errors
```bash
# Wait longer for database to start
docker-compose up -d
sleep 10
docker-compose exec app python scripts/load_data.py
```

### Out of memory
```bash
# Reduce dataset size in scripts/load_data.py:
load_books(1000)  # Instead of 10000
```

### Permission denied
```bash
# Run with sudo on Linux
sudo docker-compose up -d
```

## Tips for Success

1. **Warm up the system**
   - Run 5-10 minutes of load before measuring
   - First queries are always slower

2. **Test from separate machine**
   - Don't run load tests on same server as app
   - Or use separate Docker containers

3. **Monitor resources**
   - Watch CPU, memory, disk I/O during tests
   - Use `docker stats` command

4. **Profile under load**
   - Profile while system is under realistic load
   - Idle profiling won't show real bottlenecks

5. **Read the code**
   - Look for obvious issues in `app/app.py`
   - But verify with profiling data!

## Database Schema

```sql
-- books table
CREATE TABLE books (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    author VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    isbn VARCHAR(13) UNIQUE,
    price NUMERIC(10,2) NOT NULL,
    description TEXT,
    stock INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    category VARCHAR(100),
    published_year INTEGER,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);
-- NOTE: No indexes on title/author!

-- users table
CREATE TABLE users (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    username VARCHAR(80) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    email VARCHAR(120) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- reviews table
CREATE TABLE reviews (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    book_id INTEGER REFERENCES books(id),
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    rating INTEGER NOT NULL CHECK (rating BETWEEN 1 AND 5),
    comment TEXT,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- cart_items table
CREATE TABLE cart_items (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    book_id INTEGER REFERENCES books(id),
    quantity INTEGER DEFAULT 1,
    added_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- orders table
CREATE TABLE orders (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    total NUMERIC(10,2) NOT NULL,
    status VARCHAR(50) DEFAULT 'pending',
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);
```

## Resources

- [Flask Documentation](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/)
- [SQLAlchemy Documentation](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/)
- [wrk Load Testing Tool](https://github.com/wg/wrk)
- [Python cProfile](https://docs.python.org/3/library/profile.html)
- [SENG 468 Course Materials](https://brightspace.uvic.ca/)

## Support

For assignment questions:
- Office hours: Tuesday/Thursday 2:00-4:00 PM
- Discussion forum on Brightspace
- Email: instructor@uvic.ca

## License

This code is provided for educational purposes only as part of SENG 468.

---

**Good luck! Remember: Profile, don't guess!**

Commit message:

Revise course materials link and support information
Updated course materials link and modified support section.

README.md, after:

# BookStore API - SENG 468 Assignment 1

A simple e-commerce REST API with intentional performance issues for learning performance measurement and profiling.

## Overview

This is a Python Flask application that provides a REST API for an online bookstore. The application has several **intentional performance issues** that you will need to discover through systematic profiling and load testing.

## Technology Stack

- **Backend:** Python 3.10 with Flask
- **Database:** PostgreSQL 15
- **ORM:** SQLAlchemy
- **Deployment:** Docker Compose

## Architecture

```
┌─────────┐      ┌──────────────┐      ┌────────────┐
│ Client  │─────▶│  Flask App   │─────▶│ PostgreSQL │
│ (wrk)   │      │  (Port 5000) │      │ (Port 5432)│
└─────────┘      └──────────────┘      └────────────┘
```

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose
- curl or httpie (for testing)
- Load testing tool (wrk, Apache Bench, or Locust)

### Quick Start

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/uvic-seng468/assignment1-bookstore.git
cd assignment1-bookstore
```

2. **Start the application**
```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

3. **Wait for services to be ready** (about 10 seconds)
```bash
# Check if app is running
curl http://localhost:5000/health
```

4. **Load sample data**
```bash
docker-compose exec app python scripts/load_data.py
```

This will generate:
- 10,000 books
- 1,000 users  
- 5,000 reviews

5. **Verify data loaded**
```bash
curl http://localhost:5000/api/books | jq '.total'
# Should return: 10000
```

### Stopping the Application

```bash
docker-compose down
```

To remove all data:
```bash
docker-compose down -v
```

## API Endpoints

### Books

**List all books (paginated)**
```bash
GET /api/books?page=1&per_page=20

curl http://localhost:5000/api/books?page=1&per_page=20
```

**Get single book**
```bash
GET /api/books/:id

curl http://localhost:5000/api/books/1
```

**Create book (admin)**
```bash
POST /api/books

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/books \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "The Great Book",
    "author": "John Doe",
    "price": 29.99,
    "stock": 50,
    "category": "Fiction"
  }'
```

### Search

**Search books by title or author**
```bash
GET /api/search?q=query

curl http://localhost:5000/api/search?q=great
```

### Recommendations

**Get personalized recommendations**
```bash
GET /api/recommendations?user_id=1

curl http://localhost:5000/api/recommendations?user_id=1
```

### Cart

**Add to cart**
```bash
POST /api/cart/add

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/cart/add \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "user_id": 1,
    "book_id": 5,
    "quantity": 2
  }'
```

**View cart**
```bash
GET /api/cart?user_id=1

curl http://localhost:5000/api/cart?user_id=1
```

### Checkout

**Process order**
```bash
POST /api/checkout

curl -X POST http://localhost:5000/api/checkout \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"user_id": 1}'
```

## Load Testing Examples

### Using wrk

**Baseline test** (100 concurrent users, 60 seconds)
```bash
wrk -t4 -c100 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/books
```

**Test search endpoint**
```bash
wrk -t4 -c100 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/search?q=great
```

**Test recommendations endpoint**
```bash
wrk -t4 -c50 -d60s http://localhost:5000/api/recommendations?user_id=1
```

### Using Apache Bench

```bash
ab -n 1000 -c 50 http://localhost:5000/api/books
```

### Using Locust

Create `locustfile.py`:
```python
from locust import HttpUser, task, between

class BookStoreUser(HttpUser):
    wait_time = between(1, 3)
    
    @task(3)
    def list_books(self):
        self.client.get("/api/books?page=1")
    
    @task(2)
    def search_books(self):
        self.client.get("/api/search?q=book")
    
    @task(1)
    def get_recommendations(self):
        self.client.get("/api/recommendations?user_id=1")
```

Run:
```bash
locust -f locustfile.py --host=http://localhost:5000
```

## Profiling Examples

### CPU Profiling with cProfile

```bash
# Profile the application
docker-compose exec app python -m cProfile -o profile.stats app.py

# Analyze results
docker-compose exec app python -c "
import pstats
p = pstats.Stats('profile.stats')
p.sort_stats('cumulative').print_stats(20)
"
```

### Memory Profiling with memory_profiler

Add `@profile` decorator to functions in `app.py`, then:

```bash
docker-compose exec app python -m memory_profiler app.py
```

### Database Query Logging

PostgreSQL slow query log is automatically enabled. View logs:

```bash
docker-compose logs db | grep "duration"
```

### Enable SQLAlchemy Query Logging

Add to `app.py`:
```python
import logging
logging.basicConfig()
logging.getLogger('sqlalchemy.engine').setLevel(logging.INFO)
```

## Known Performance Issues

The application has several **intentional** performance problems:

1. **N+1 Query Problems**
   - Book listing fetches reviews separately for each book
   - Cart viewing fetches book details one by one
   - Search results calculate ratings with separate queries

2. **Missing Database Indexes**
   - No index on `books.title` (used in search)
   - No index on `books.author` (used in search)
   - Full table scans on search queries

3. **Inefficient Algorithms**
   - Recommendation engine uses CPU-intensive scoring
   - Wasteful loop iterations (100 iterations per book!)
   - In-memory sorting of all books

4. **Memory Leak**
   - Recommendation cache grows unbounded
   - New cache entry every minute
   - Never cleaned up

5. **No Caching**
   - No Redis cache configured
   - No HTTP caching headers
   - Every request hits database

6. **Other Issues**
   - Synchronous I/O (no async)
   - No connection pooling optimization
   - No query result caching

## Your Task

Use load testing and profiling to:

1. **Measure** baseline performance
2. **Identify** these bottlenecks systematically
3. **Profile** to find exact locations in code
4. **Recommend** specific fixes with expected impact

**Don't guess!** Use profiling data to prove where the problems are.

## Troubleshooting

### Port already in use
```bash
# Change ports in docker-compose.yml
ports:
  - "5001:5000"  # Use port 5001 instead
```

### Database connection errors
```bash
# Wait longer for database to start
docker-compose up -d
sleep 10
docker-compose exec app python scripts/load_data.py
```

### Out of memory
```bash
# Reduce dataset size in scripts/load_data.py:
load_books(1000)  # Instead of 10000
```

### Permission denied
```bash
# Run with sudo on Linux
sudo docker-compose up -d
```

## Tips for Success

1. **Warm up the system**
   - Run 5-10 minutes of load before measuring
   - First queries are always slower

2. **Test from separate machine**
   - Don't run load tests on same server as app
   - Or use separate Docker containers

3. **Monitor resources**
   - Watch CPU, memory, disk I/O during tests
   - Use `docker stats` command

4. **Profile under load**
   - Profile while system is under realistic load
   - Idle profiling won't show real bottlenecks

5. **Read the code**
   - Look for obvious issues in `app/app.py`
   - But verify with profiling data!

## Database Schema

```sql
-- books table
CREATE TABLE books (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    author VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    isbn VARCHAR(13) UNIQUE,
    price NUMERIC(10,2) NOT NULL,
    description TEXT,
    stock INTEGER DEFAULT 0,
    category VARCHAR(100),
    published_year INTEGER,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);
-- NOTE: No indexes on title/author!

-- users table
CREATE TABLE users (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    username VARCHAR(80) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    email VARCHAR(120) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- reviews table
CREATE TABLE reviews (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    book_id INTEGER REFERENCES books(id),
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    rating INTEGER NOT NULL CHECK (rating BETWEEN 1 AND 5),
    comment TEXT,
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- cart_items table
CREATE TABLE cart_items (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    book_id INTEGER REFERENCES books(id),
    quantity INTEGER DEFAULT 1,
    added_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);

-- orders table
CREATE TABLE orders (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    user_id INTEGER REFERENCES users(id),
    total NUMERIC(10,2) NOT NULL,
    status VARCHAR(50) DEFAULT 'pending',
    created_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT NOW()
);
```

## Resources

- [Flask Documentation](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/)
- [SQLAlchemy Documentation](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/)
- [wrk Load Testing Tool](https://github.com/wg/wrk)
- [Python cProfile](https://docs.python.org/3/library/profile.html)
- [SENG 468 Course Materials](https://bright.uvic.ca/d2l/home/467415)


## License

This code is provided for educational purposes only as part of SENG 468 and is made with the help of AI!

---

**Good luck!**
